---
layout: post
title: pyfunc
tags:
- python
---

Python has a solid backbone of modules for various operations. It
would be a pity if we had to write one-liner python programs just because we
cannot avail those functionalities on the command line - wouldn't it?

**Day 1:**

I wanted to query a heavily nested json for a specific key.
Now [jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/) does the job pretty well, but the
easier way was to flatten the json and just grep out the required key. I had
a flatten json python function already written. So all I did was to write a
simple program to use that function and flatten the file passed as a command 
line argument. Good enough.

**Day 2:**

I wanted to find out if one file is a subset of the other. I looked it up and
saw that [this](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/16349543/how-to-determine-if-the-content-of-one-file-is-included-in-the-content-of-anothe)
post describes a way to do so:

{% highlight bash %}
$ cat > a
1
2

$ cat > b
1
2
3

$ cat b | sort -u | wc
3 3 6

$ cat a b | sort -u | wc
3 3 6
{% endhighlight %}

as both of the above results are same - **a** is a subset of **b**. Pretty neat but then I 
would need to compare the two results and write a shell script todo so. The python library provides 
the set data structure having the very intuitive **issubset** function which just does this. 
So all I did was to write a simple program to use that function and do the necessary check. Does the trick.

**Day 3:**

A colleague was mangling some text and asked me how to convert uppercase to
lowercase. I showed him how:

{% highlight bash %}
$ echo TEST | tr '[A-Z]' '[a-z]'
test
{% endhighlight %}

He asked is there a similar functionality to swap case? I did not have a ready
answer to do so on the command line but told him that he could write a one
liner python script using **string.swapcase** to do so. So all I did...

Now wait a minute...

Why would I want to write separate programs to flatten a json, check if a file
is a subset of the other or swap case when I could very written write one
program which takes the target module, function to call, its arguments and
does the right thing?

Enter [pyfunc](https://github.com/saurabh-hirani/pyfunc)

Now all of the above problems are solved by doing:

{% highlight bash %}
$ cat /var/tmp/meal.json
{
  "sandwich": {
    "ingredients": {
      "breads": {
        "fancy_name": {
          "price": "exhorbiant",
          "taste": "exotic/oaky with a savory aftertaste"
        },
        "just_bread": {
          "price": "affordable",
          "taste": "like bread"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}

$ pyfunc -m pyfunc.utils.json_flatten -a /var/tmp/meal.json  | grep 'fancy_name.price'
sandwich.ingredients.breads.fancy_name.price: exhorbiant

$ echo TeSt | pyfunc -m string.swapcase
tEsT

$ pyfunc -m pyfunc.utils.f_is_subset -a /var/tmp/f1 /var/tmp/f2
True
{% endhighlight %}

I get everything in the standard library as a bonus:


{% highlight bash %}
$ pyfunc -m range 1 7 2
1
3
5
{% endhighlight %}

For the commonly used pyfunc calls I convert them to aliases:

{% highlight bash %}
$ alias jsonflatten='pyfunc -m pyfunc.utils.json_flatten -a'
$ alias fsubset='pyfunc -m pyfunc.utils.f_is_subset -a'
{% endhighlight %}

And now I have a richer command line:

{% highlight bash %}
$ cat /var/tmp/meal.json | jsonflatten | grep 'fancy_name.price' | cut -f2 -d':'
exhorbiant
{% endhighlight %}

The only glitch that I faced while writing this was to accomodate different
types of arguments being passed to the target functions like list, dict, etc.
I added support for method signatures to do so, but now I feel it would be 
easier to have pyfunc functions to just take args and pass in a json from the
command line. I will be adding that soon.

**pip** [pyfunc](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pyfunc/) up and bring the awesomeness of python on the command line!
